# Temporal Positive Pointwise Mutual Information (TPPMI)

## Contributors

Zsófia Rakovics & Márton Rakovics

## Motivation

The goal of this repository is to demonstrate the calculation and potential usage of Temporal Positive Pointwise Mutual Information (TPPMI) in some simple examples. 
The code was written for the researchers (mainly sociologists) of the Research Center for Computational Social Science to experiment with the method and get quick visualisations for some target words according to their research interests.

## Data

A subset of the Orbán corpus is used in this repository as examples. The corpus contains the Hungarian speeches of Prime Minister Viktor Orbán between 2010 and 2022.

### PPMI matrices

The PPMI matrices were computed in advance for each year of the corpus to ease the usage and focus on the experiments with the TPPMI.

## Code

### TPPMI functions

The `tppmi_functions.R` script contains the functions operating in the backend. 
The relevant functions are:
- `load_ppmi`: This function loads the PPMI matrices from the example data folder.
- `calc_tppmi`: This function calculates the TPPMI matrices for each word. It returns a list of TPPMI matrices, the length of list equals the number of target words defined by the user.
- `dimred_ttpmi`: This function reduces the dimension of TPPMI matrices. (As a preparation for the visualisation.)
- `tppmi_pca_viz`: This function visualizes the TPPMI word vectors in 2 dimensions

### TPPMI visuals

The `tppmi_visual.R` script is a support for the preliminary analysis.
This script does the following steps:
- loads (and calls) the functions of the backend (available in the `tppmi_functions.R` script),
- loads the example PPMI matrices (computed for the Orbán corpus) provided for the user,
- defines target words of the preliminary analysis, 
- calculates the TPPMI matrices,
- reduces the dimension of the TPPMI matrices (as a preparation for the visualisation),
- visualizes the results.

The users can modify the script and define `target_words` according to their research interests.

## Visualisation

The experimental visualisations generated by the `tppmi_visual.R` script displays the word vectors of the selected `target_words` in two dimensions.

For the interpretation of the figure:
- The horizontal axis shows the values measured in the first principal component.
- The vertical axis shows the values measured in the second principal component.
- The shift over time is represented by a color scale from green (first year) to bluish purple (last year) using the default setting.
- The figure also shows the year numbers as labels.

## Notes

For deeper analysis further statistics and metrics can be computed (e.g. different similarities of word vectors) and proper visuals can be generated. 
In this demo repository the visualisation attributes (e.g. color, title, label, etc.) can only be customised with restrictions.

This repository contains only some demonstrative examples to support the experiments with TPPMI.

